Regex groups (#438)
arcus/education_modules: regular_expressions_groups/regular_expressions_groups.md

<!--

author:   Joy Payton
email:    paytonk@chop.edu
version:  1.0.0
current_version_description: Initial version
module_type: standard
docs_version: 1.0.0
language: en
narrator: US English Female
mode: Textbook
previous_sequential_module: regular_expressions_basics

title: Regular Expressions: Groups

comment:  Use regular expressions, or regex, for complex pattern matching involving capturing and non-capturing groups.

long_description: Learn to compose advanced regular expressions using capturing and non-capturing groups in order to find and extract important text that matches patterns you describe.

estimated_time_in_minutes: 30

@pre_reqs

> Learners should have some experience composing and using simple regular expressions (regex).  For an introduction to regular expression concepts, consider the [Demystifying Regular Expressions](https://liascript.github.io/course/?https://raw.githubusercontent.com/arcus/education_modules/main/demystifying_regular_expressions/demystifying_regular_expressions.md#1) module.  To learn how to compose and use simple regular expressions, consider the [Regular Expressions Basics](https://liascript.github.io/course/?https://raw.githubusercontent.com/arcus/education_modules/main/regular_expressions_basics/regular_expressions_basics.md#1) module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Learners should have some experience composing and using simple regular expressions (regex).  For an introduction to regular expression concepts and using regular expression checkers like [Regex101](https://www.regex101.com/), consider the [Demystifying Regular Expressions](https://liascript.github.io/course/?https://raw.githubusercontent.com/arcus/education_modules/main/demystifying_regular_expressions/demystifying_regular_expressions.md#1) module.  To learn how to compose and use simple regular expressions, consider the [Regular Expressions Basics](https://liascript.github.io/course/?https://raw.githubusercontent.com/arcus/education_modules/main/regular_expressions_basics/regular_expressions_basics.md#1) module.
```

`(\d+)_[PMF]_[A-Z\d]+_\d+`

We can do multiple capturing groups, too.  In a programming language, you'll be able to write code that will give you the results of these capture groups.  For example, if you have a data frame with a column called "id" that has the long identifiers, you could split out that data into four additional columns that you call "trio\_id", "trio\_role", "subject\_id", and "accession\_id".  We won't go into how to integrate regular expressions into your R or Python code in this module, but on the next page we'll go over looking at capturing groups in a regex checker.

### Capturing Groups in a Regex Checker

You can look at the capturing results for multiple groups and practice this skill in a regex checker, regardless of whether you also use a programming language like R or Python.  For example, let's say we wanted to extract all four components of our long id, `002923_P_A56G199C2_030023472948651`. 

We can put parentheses around each group and add this regular expression to a regex checker like [Regex 101](https://www.regex101.com) and check to make sure we're capturing what we intend to.

> We'll add the pattern `(\d+)_([PMF])_([A-Z\d]+)_(\d+)` to the small box labeled "regular expression", and our sample id, `002923_P_A56G199C2_030023472948651`, to the larger box labeled "test string".  [We can then see our captured groups on the right!](https://regex101.com/r/XmG4kp/1)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'll add the pattern `(\d+)_([PMF])_([A-Z\d]+)_(\d+)` to the small box labeled "Regular Expression," and our sample id, `002923_P_A56G199C2_030023472948651`, to the larger box labeled "Test String."  [We can then see our captured groups on the right!](https://regex101.com/r/XmG4kp/1)
```
Capitalizing section names to match how you refer to them after the picture.

### Quiz: Capturing Groups

Consider a regular expression with capturing group that describes email addresses:

`[A-Za-z\d\-\._]+@([A-Za-z\d\-\._]+\.[A-Za-z]{2,})`

 What will the capturing group in this regular expression actually capture?

[( )] The entire email address
[( )] The user mailbox (the entire part before the `@` of the email address)
[(X)] The email domain (the entire part following the `@` of the email address)
[( )] The TLD, or "top level domain" (the last period and last few letters, like `.com`, `.edu`, or `.gov`)
[( )] None of these
[[?]] Hint: Feeling stuck?  Try using [Regex 101](https://www.regex101.com)!
***
<div class = "answer">

This regex looks intimidating, but it's really only a few parts.  Let's break it apart considering the email address `regex_is_awesome_123@fakemail.org`

* `[A-Za-z\d\-\._]+` means one or more letter, number, hyphen, period, or underscore (in our case, "regex\_is\_awesome\_123")
* `@` indicates the `@`
* `[A-Za-z\d\-\._]+` again means one or more letter, number, hyphen, period, or underscore ("fakemail")
* `\.` indicates a literal period
* `[A-Za-z]{2,}` indicates two or more letters ("org").

> In our case, we had a capturing group around the last three of those bullet points.  That means that what is captured is "fastmail.org", the entire email domain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our case, we had a capturing group around the last three of those bullet points.  That means that what is captured is the entire email domain ("fakemail.org").
```
I think this matches the style of the previous examples in this section and solves a bit of my punctuation/quotation/verbatim angst.

</div>
***

## The Logical "Or"

Sometimes you want to define two different pattern options at a certain point in a complex string.  For example, let's consider a mouse model study of the immune system's interaction with insulin.  

Your wild type subjects are given identifiers that include `WT` (wild type), followed by a hyphen, and a subject identifier of usually five (but possibly 6) digits.  You additionally have PBMC humanized mice, in addition to wild type mice, and their identifiers begin with `PBMC`, followed by a hyphen, followed by 5-6 digits.

There's a handy way to indicate a logical "or" in regex, using the vertical pipe (`|`).  Text on either side of a `|` character are alternative values for the given part of a pattern. 

> For example, `8|5` indicates that either an 8 or a 5 appears at a given location. `banana|B` indicates that the word "banana" or the abbreviation "B" appears.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, `8|5` indicates that either an 8 or a 5 appears at a given location.  Similarly,`banana|B` indicates that the word "banana" or the abbreviation "B" appears.  
```
Oooo, this is the first time I've noticed a "sentences start with words not symbols" example :)

<div class = "important">
<b style="color: rgb(var(--color-highlight));">Important note</b><br>

> Could we use a **list**, like `[85]` or `[58]`, instead of using the pipe to write `8|5` to indicate "either a five or an eight."  Yes, and that's usually the best choice, when you're dealing with a single character in a pattern that has several alternatives.  For example, it's easier to write `[ABC123]` than it is to write `A|B|C|1|2|3`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Could we indicate "either a five or an eight" using a **list**, like `[85]` or `[58]`, instead of using the pipe `8|5`?  Yes, and that's usually the best choice, when you're dealing with a single character in a pattern that has several alternatives.  For example, it's easier to write `[ABC123]` than it is to write `A|B|C|1|2|3`.
```

However, when you are dealing with a string of **more than one character**, like the entire word "banana" being one alternative, or "B" being the other alternative, you can't use a list!  

> As a reminder, a list is a token that represents **a single character** (which might repeat some number of times).  You can't indicate a multi-character string in a list.  `[banana]`, for example, means "b, or a, or n, or a, or n, or a".  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a reminder, a list is a token that represents **a single character** (which might repeat some number of times).  You can't indicate a multi-character string in a list.  `[banana]`, for example, means "b, or a, or n, or a, or n, or a."  
```

If that's the case, you can indicate that it's a **non-capturing group** by adding `?:` after the opening parenthesis, like this:

`(?:WT|PBMC)\-\d{5,6}`

[This will also work](https://regex101.com/r/ko7ySn/1) as a matching regular expression, but won't capture the group in question.

This may seem unnecessary.  Why go to the trouble of creating a non-capturing group?  You could simply use a capturing group but not pay any attention to what you capture.  That's true, but consider that in a long string, you might actually want to capture some data and not capture other data, and getting an extra captured group could be confusing or annoying.  It's useful to be able to group things and **not** capture them.

### Quiz: Non-Capturing Groups and the Logical "Or"

You're looking through lab notes written by a colleague who uses codes and abbreviations liberally.  

This investigator is known to write their lowercase initials ("sjp") and a single space followed by either "help" (always in lowercase) or "911" in notes to highlight important potential pitfalls.  

> Using the logical "or" and using a non-capturing group (remember: the syntax is `(?:)`), write a regular expression that would allow you to capture any of the "sjp help" or "sjp 911" references.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the logical "or" and using a non-capturing group (remember: the syntax is `(?:)`), write a regular expression that would match both the "sjp help" and "sjp 911" patterns.
```

I think you were using a colloquial "capture" here mixed in with the technical "non-capturing"

Put that regular expression in the box below:

[[see answer box below for two alternatives]]
<script>
  let input = "@input";
  input == "sjp (?:help|911)" || input == "sjp (?:911|help)" ;
</script>
***
<div class = "answer">

You'll begin by posing your two alternatives, either `help|911` or `911|help`, the order doesn't matter.  Then, you wrap that in the non-capturing group to give `(?:help|911)` or `(?:911|help)`.  But don't forget your collague's initials and the space!  The final regex should read `sjp (?:help|911)` or `sjp (?:911|help)`.

</div>
***

## Additional Resources

Groups:

> * [Capture Group Numbering & Naming: The Gory Details](https://www.rexegg.com/regex-capture.html) goes into detail about how to add numbering to capture groups, which can be helpful in advanced search and replace functions.  This goes beyond the scope we were able to cover in this module.

Reviewer: Maybe move the Groups section to below the cheat sheets, it is a great resource but definitely a little intimidating!

Author: I moved the Groups section down in a new commit @drelliche!

> 
> Groups:
> 
> * [Capture Group Numbering & Naming: The Gory Details](https://www.rexegg.com/regex-capture.html) goes into detail about how to add numbering to capture groups, which can be helpful in advanced search and replace functions.  This goes beyond the scope we were able to cover in this module.
> 
> 
> General regex cheat sheets:
> 
> * [Dave Child's cheat sheet](https://cheatography.com/davechild/cheat-sheets/regular-expressions/) is fairly comprehensive.
> * [DataCamp's cheat sheet for regex](https://images.datacamp.com/image/upload/v1665049611/Marketing/Blog/Regular_Expressions_Cheat_Sheet.pdf) is another good option.
> 
> 
> If you want to check out regular expression checkers, here are a few we like:
> 
> * [Regex 101](https://regex101.com) is the regular expressions tester used in this module.  We use it regularly, even after working with regular expressions for many years.
> * [RegExr](https://regexr.com/) has helpful teaching aids, including a hover-over explainer that allows you to investigate matches, and a way to look at complex nested elements (for instance, a range of characters inside square brackets inside a capturing group) in a visual way.
> * [RegEx Testing](https://www.regextester.com/) has a clean, simple interface and a library of popular regular expressions to start with. 
> 

Author: ```suggestion

General regex cheat sheets:

* [Dave Child's cheat sheet](https://cheatography.com/davechild/cheat-sheets/regular-expressions/) is fairly comprehensive.
* [DataCamp's cheat sheet for regex](https://images.datacamp.com/image/upload/v1665049611/Marketing/Blog/Regular_Expressions_Cheat_Sheet.pdf) is another good option.

If you want to check out regular expression checkers, here are a few we like:

* [Regex 101](https://regex101.com) is the regular expressions tester used in this module.  We use it regularly, even after working with regular expressions for many years.
* [RegExr](https://regexr.com/) has helpful teaching aids, including a hover-over explainer that allows you to investigate matches, and a way to look at complex nested elements (for instance, a range of characters inside square brackets inside a capturing group) in a visual way.
* [RegEx Testing](https://www.regextester.com/) has a clean, simple interface and a library of popular regular expressions to start with. 

Groups:

* [Capture Group Numbering & Naming: The Gory Details](https://www.rexegg.com/regex-capture.html) goes into detail about how to add numbering to capture groups, which can be helpful in advanced search and replace functions.  This goes beyond the scope we were able to cover in this module.

```
